README.md, before:

# Project1
Financial Analysis 

Price Earning Ratio and Risk 

From the generated price earning ratio graph from yfinance data, company NVIDIA flagging high of 96.18 and shows highest future growth whereas Google stock seems to be undervalued as it remains low at 24.23. Company Amazon reflects with the second highest price earning score of 58.45. 

Looking at the risk radar plot, NVIDIA shows highest risk of 1.68 showing most volatility among the 5 companies compared.  In contrast Microsoft shows 0.9 beta value (<1) showing more stability in the stock market value.

<img src="https://github.com/ElleNaazB/Project-1/blob/Santosh/IMAGE1.png">



Revenue VS Profit Margin

From the comparison of the following graphs, it is noted that Amazon is generating the highest revenue of 575 billion whereas profit margin remains low. We noted is due to competitive pricing strategies or new investments strategies.

Even if, NVDA has the lowest revenue across 5 companies, it is showing the highest profit margin of on or above 0.40. When further explored it was noted tech giants including Google, Meta and others are massively using NVIDIA produced chips to drive their AI technologies. 

With the 307 billions of total revenue, Google was able to gain approximately 0.20 profit margin.


<img src="https://github.com/ElleNaazB/Project-1/blob/Santosh/IMAGE3.png"> <img src="https://github.com/ElleNaazB/Project-1/blob/Santosh/IMAGE4.png">




Market Capitalization, Price Earning and Earning Per Share

While reviewing the following combined graph, it is noted that Microsoft remains at the top securing highest market capitalization with 3002.34 billion shares and also remains first in demonstrating highest earning per share amount of 11.07. The second highest market coverage is captured by Apple however it’s earning per share remains low of 6.44 which just higher than Google (5.80) however below than NVDA.  In contrast Amazon remained lowest in generating earning per share amount of just $2.90. Even though it’s price earning remained the highest of 58.45, the earning per share amount was significantly lower of 2.90.

<img src="https://github.com/ElleNaazB/Project-1/blob/Santosh/IMAGE%205.png">

Commit message:

PE Ratio and PE Growth added.

README.md, after:

# Project1
Financial Analysis 

### Price Earning Ratio and Risk 

From the generated price earning ratio graph from yfinance data, company NVIDIA flagging high of 96.18 and shows highest future growth whereas Google stock seems to be undervalued as it remains low at 24.23. Company Amazon reflects with the second highest price earning score of 58.45. 

Looking at the risk radar plot, NVIDIA shows highest risk of 1.68 showing most volatility among the 5 companies compared.  In contrast Microsoft shows 0.9 beta value (<1) showing more stability in the stock market value.

<img src="https://github.com/ElleNaazB/Project-1/blob/Santosh/IMAGE1.png">  <img src= "https://github.com/ElleNaazB/Project-1/blob/Santosh/IMAGE2.png">



### Revenue VS Profit Margin

From the comparison of the following graphs, it is noted that Amazon is generating the highest revenue of 575 billion whereas profit margin remains low. We noted is due to competitive pricing strategies or new investments strategies.

Even if, NVDA has the lowest revenue across 5 companies, it is showing the highest profit margin of on or above 0.40. When further explored it was noted tech giants including Google, Meta and others are massively using NVIDIA produced chips to drive their AI technologies. 

With the 307 billions of total revenue, Google was able to gain approximately 0.20 profit margin.


<img src="https://github.com/ElleNaazB/Project-1/blob/Santosh/IMAGE3.png"> <img src="https://github.com/ElleNaazB/Project-1/blob/Santosh/IMAGE4.png">




### Market Capitalization, Price Earning and Earning Per Share

While reviewing the following combined graph, it is noted that Microsoft remains at the top securing highest market capitalization with 3002.34 billion shares and also remains first in demonstrating highest earning per share amount of 11.07. The second highest market coverage is captured by Apple however it’s earning per share remains low of 6.44 which just higher than Google (5.80) however below than NVDA.  In contrast Amazon remained lowest in generating earning per share amount of just $2.90. Even though it’s price earning remained the highest of 58.45, the earning per share amount was significantly lower of 2.90.

<img src="https://github.com/ElleNaazB/Project-1/blob/Santosh/IMAGE%205.png">


### Price Earnings Ratio vs Price Earnings to Growth

PEG ratios higher than 1.0 are generally considered unfavorable, suggesting a stock is overvalued.

In the following graph except Google, other 4 companies have forecasted their price earnings ratio from 25 to 31.33. 

NVDA which had forwardPE of 30.86, has only forcasted PEG of 0.57. So, it means stock will likely be undervalued in the future.  It suggests that stock price may be undervalued relative to it’s growth rate and indicates investment opportunity potentials.

Google has the lower forwardPE ratio of 17.90 as compared to others and  PEG ratio of 1.08 which is fairly valued relative to its growth rate.

Other three companies Microsoft, Apple and Amazon with on or above 2.13 PEG ratios, will likely their stock price be overvalued relative to their earning growth rates. Companies are reflecting on investors’ commitment and confidence level on companies’ prospects for safer investment, strong brands, innovative products and leading businesses in the industry. The companies predict investors are willing to pay premium for their future earnings. 

<img src="https://github.com/ElleNaazB/Project-1/blob/Santosh/IMAGE6.png">
